# First Encounter: Bloodsong Crucible

## Honor at the Riverbank

You're dreaming tonight. It feels like you're floating down a river. It is calm.
You are not uncomfortable.

You wake up choking on metallic-tasting water, the sound of it lapping at the
shore sharp in your ears. Blinking, you realize you’re naked and lying on a
riverbank. The ground is rough beneath you, the air stings your throat, and
nothing—not your surroundings, not even your own name—makes sense. Panic starts
to rise, but before you can act, you spot a group of men approaching.

They’re armored in gleaming bronze, their movements precise and purposeful.
Shields marked with a strange triangular symbol glint in the sun, and each man
carries a long spear. Behind them trails another group, dressed plainly,
carrying tools you’d guess are for harvesting. The soldiers spot you
immediately. One raises his spear, shouting a command in a language you don’t
understand.

The leader strides forward, his face a mask of cold authority. He glances at
you, then at the soldiers behind him. You can’t catch every word, but his tone
is clear: wary and commanding. Two soldiers break from the group, their shields
raised as they approach.

“Stand up,” one of them orders, his voice sharp. “Slowly. Hands where we can see
them.”

Your mind spins, but your body obeys. They watch you like you might explode. One
circles behind you, his movements deliberate, while the other holds his spear
steady. The leader steps closer, his scrutiny sharp enough to make your skin
crawl. After a moment, he nods.

“You’ll come with us,” he says, his tone leaving no room for argument. “Don’t
run. Don’t fight.”

You’re folded into their formation, surrounded by bronze-clad warriors. The
plainly dressed workers—helots, as one of the soldiers calls them—don’t meet
your gaze. They’re quiet but purposeful as the group marches toward the
riverbank. You stumble along, too stunned to do anything else.

When you reach the river, the helots set to work cutting tall, crimson reeds.
The soldiers keep watch, their spears ready. A scythe is pressed into your
hands, and you’re told to help. Your hands shake as you start cutting, trying
not to draw attention. Nearby, a soldier scolds a helot for slacking, though his
tone is firm rather than cruel. Another even takes a heavy bundle from an older
worker, carrying it himself.

The calm doesn’t last. A guttural growl freezes everyone in place. From the
shadows of the forest, figures emerge—huge, broad-shouldered beings with ridged
foreheads and dark, jagged armor. They carry strange crescent-shaped weapons
that gleam in the light, and their snarls are nothing short of feral. One steps
forward, roaring a challenge you can’t understand but instinctively know is a
threat.

The leader of the soldiers doesn’t flinch. He raises his spear and barks a
command. The soldiers snap into a tight formation, shields locking into a wall.
You and the helots are herded behind them, the soldiers’ backs forming a barrier
between you and the raiders.

The attackers charge. The clash is deafening: metal on metal, shouts mixing with
the snarls of the attackers. The strange crescent blades swing in wide arcs,
smashing into shields, while the soldiers thrust their spears with deadly
precision. For a moment, the line holds. Then, one soldier falls. Another steps
up instantly, covering the gap. You realize with a start that they’re willing to
die to protect you—a stranger they just met.

A blade swings too close. You try to move, but pain flares in your chest, hot
and blinding. You collapse, vision dimming as the chaos continues around you.
The last thing you hear is the soldiers’ chants, defiant even as the world
fades.
