# The Valleys of the River of Souls

The River of Souls is a vast, enigmatic realm shaped by an endless series of
river valleys. These valleys are as diverse as the beings that inhabit them, yet
they share a common foundation of isolation and mystery. Each valley forms a
self-contained world, rich with its own geography, cultures, and challenges,
while remaining part of a greater, interconnected network.

---

# **The Geography of Valleys**

Each valley in the River of Souls is defined by its stark boundaries. Towering
cliffs and impassable mountains rise at the edges, forming natural walls that
confine their inhabitants. The rivers, snaking through the heart of every
valley, are both lifelines and barriers. Their waters sustain life and carve the
terrain, but they also divide one valley from the next with rapids, cataracts,
and plunging waterfalls that make travel a deadly gamble.

These rivers are more than mere geographical features; they are woven into the
fabric of existence. Those who die without binding to a monolith find themselves
reborn along distant riverbanks, carried to entirely new valleys by forces no
one fully understands. This phenomenon, called riverspawning, reinforces the
isolation of each valley while adding an element of unpredictability to life.

The valleys themselves vary wildly in climate and composition. Some are lush,
verdant paradises with thriving ecosystems, while others are barren wastelands
or chaotic blends of strange biomes. No two are the same, yet all share the same
essential structure: a river running through the center, fertile banks where
life takes hold, and harsh boundaries that hem them in.

## Directional Terms

In the absence of traditional cardinal directions like north, south, east, and
west, directional terms in the valleys are oriented around the rivers. The flow
of the river defines everything:

- **Upriver** refers to the direction toward the river's source, typically
  higher in elevation.
- **Downriver** points toward the river's mouth or the next valley downstream.
- **Left Bank** describes the land on the left side of the river as you face
  downstream.
- **Right Bank** refers to the land on the right side of the river under the
  same orientation.

These terms are universally understood by valley inhabitants and form the basis
for navigation and communication about locations and travel.

## Inlets and Outlets

At the edges of every valley, the river marks its dramatic entry and exit
points. These are known as the **Inlet** and **Outlet**, though the names vary
across cultures. The Inlet is where the river enters the valley, often cascading
down from the tail of a vast and treacherous cataract or waterfalls. It is a
place of roaring water and danger, symbolizing the relentless force of nature—or
fate—that shapes the valley.

The Outlet, on the other hand, is where the river drains out, plunging into the
head of another cataract that leads to the next valley. To some cultures, the
Outlet is a symbol of departure or the unknown, while to others, it is viewed as
the edge of the world. Together, the Inlet and Outlet define the natural
boundaries of the valley, creating both awe and fear in those who live near
them.

## The Monoliths

Monoliths are towering structures scattered throughout each valley, their
purpose and origin shrouded in mystery. Typically, there are as many monoliths
in a valley as there are primary cultures in a seeding. These structures are
focal points for life, death, and power within the valley.

Large populations and centers of power naturally gravitate toward monoliths.
They provide a vital function: individuals bound to a monolith will respawn
there upon death. However, this binding confers no inherent ownership. Anyone
bound to a monolith gains its benefit, regardless of who controls the
surrounding area. Practically, though, political entities that dominate the land
around a monolith often treat it as their own.

Many cultures fortify their monoliths, constructing defenses to protect them
from seizure. These fortifications can serve multiple purposes: safeguarding
their citizens’ ability to respawn, asserting dominance over rivals, or even
enslaving others bound to the monolith. Control of a monolith often becomes a
strategic necessity, shaping the valley’s political and social landscape.

In addition to the geographic advantages provided by monoliths, control of the
river itself is a potent source of power. Cultures that dominate areas near the
Inlet have significant influence over riverspawns, often determining whether
newcomers are welcomed or oppressed. Those further downriver or away from the
riverbanks experience less of this constant influx, creating differing dynamics
based on their position relative to the river.

---

# **The Lifecycle of Valleys**

Valleys are living places, not in the biological sense, but in the way they
shape and are shaped by those who inhabit them. No one truly knows how valleys
come into being. Some believe they have always existed, while others claim they
are created by unknowable forces. Whatever the truth, every valley begins with
its seeding—the introduction of its first inhabitants.

## Seeding

Seeding is what restarts a fallow valley, breathing life into a place that has
gone silent. During this event, the valley is populated with people from a
handful of primary cultures, alongside a scattering of individuals from other
backgrounds.

The time of seeding is nearly always unpredictable and chaotic, as tens or
hundreds of thousands of diverse people are thrown into a strange and unknown
world unlike any other theyve encountered.  One night they were eating pizza (or
falafels or roast boar or whatever) and the next morning they were... on a
strange riverbank in their pajamas.

### Primary Cultures

Primary cultures usually make up between 60-90% of the total seeded population,
providing the foundation for the valley’s societal structures. A seeding
typically includes three to five primary cultures, ensuring a rich interplay of
ideas and traditions.

### Scatterlings

The scatterlings — those not part of the primary cultures — add a layer of
unpredictability. Each comes from a unique non-primary culture, with no
duplicates among them. However, these solitary figures face a grim reality: more
often than not, they are killed before they can bind to a monolith. This forces
them into riverspawning, scattering them further and reducing their initial
presence in the valley.

Those that do manage to survive the initial culling do so either by becoming
hidden, or integrating with one of the primary cultures due to their unique
perspectives or abilities.  Thus some shape the valley’s development in
unexpected ways, but the majority fade into obscurity, leaving only fleeting
impacts.

## Equilibrium

Over time, societies form and evolve within the valley’s boundaries. The fertile
banks of the river become centers of settlement, while the surrounding
wilderness offers both resources and dangers. Monoliths, towering structures of
unknown origin, often become focal points for these communities. They serve as
respawn anchors, binding individuals to the valley and anchoring their existence
within it.

## Decline

Populations often believe themselves to be the first to inhabit their valley,
but this illusion rarely lasts. As they explore, they uncover remnants of those
who came before: the ruins of settlements, strange tools, and enigmatic
artifacts that hint at forgotten stories. These discoveries fuel speculation and
myth, adding depth to the valley’s emerging culture.

Yet, valleys are not eternal. They can fall silent, their populations wiped out
by conflict, catastrophe, or slow decline. These abandoned valleys, known as
fallow valleys, are haunting places. Their landscapes bear the scars of those
who came before: overgrown cities, half-buried monoliths, and echoes of lives
lost to time. Fallow valleys may remain empty for ages, but eventually, they too
are reseeded, their stories beginning anew.

---

The valleys of the River of Souls are as much characters in the world as the
beings who inhabit them. Their geography, their lifecycles, and their enduring
mysteries form the backdrop for countless tales of survival, discovery, and
transformation. Each valley is a crucible, a place where life persists against
the odds, forging new paths and new stories in the endless flow of the river.
